---
layout: post
title:      "“Why did you decide to study SoftwareEngineering?”"
date:       2020-07-20 04:01:41 +0000
permalink:  why_did_you_decide_to_study_softwareengineering
---

Why did you decide to learn software engineering? 

I already had an answer to the question of this blog post. Yes I already knew why during the middle of a global pandemic, being unemployed, and being as unsure of what the future would hold as I've ever been I wanted to take on one of the biggest commitments of my life. I wanted to wait as long as I could to publish this blog which in this case was today. I felt like after two weeks of a coding bootcamp I would have an even deeper response. I knew that there was going to be a lab (or two) that would make me want to snap the screen off of my macbook and in order for me to not do that I had to remind myself of the answer to the above question. Taking it a step further, I knew there might even be a time when I questioned the answer to that question and I would have to dig deeper as to what my motivation was and come up with more answers. 

Now that I'm hashing this all out in this post I'm leaning more towards the notion that this wasn't so much a decision of mine but the result of a "perfect storm" of outside events and inner occurrences. I worked in the service industry for the past five years. I worked funky late-night schedules, met a lot of people, had a bunch of memorable experiences, learned a lot from those with a lot of experience, and made enough money to live off of. It was a perfect concotion of all those things that kept me where I was. I always wanted to do something that could elevate all of those things: work schedule, pay, personal fufilment. But I had enough from my job to keep me in "I can't complain" mode. 

The first question I asked myself when NYC went into lockdown for covid was, "how long?" I didn't want to wait to hear a date and then just spend all my days counting down to that day. The idea of it felt really stifling and I felt that if I was going to endure that, I would seriously question my existence. But I felt more moved to do something than uncomfortable because I couldnt do what I used to. I began just thinking about all the ideas I had in my head and remembered I had started FreeCodeCamp a year or so ago. 

As I looked around the world stopped but technology kept going. It kept together the bit of the world that didn't stop. And when I say technology I mean specifically computers. The same way a machine like a phone moved from just having buttons, to having a screen with buttons, to just having a screen is the way I think most machines will evolve. In other words things will become more computerized. I'm not making the claim that machines will outlive humans no matter what but I think I did have an epiphany that software and backend programming will be at the heart of technology. That realization made me want to dig further and pull back the curtain and see for myself what it looks like to be in the backend of everything I see and use around me. Well, besides the fact that I always wanted to get through to morpheus, learn how to program the hosts in westworld, and make that cooking app.  Once I got a glimpse of what is being done I felt a push to learn how to do it. 

My main resources were FCC and Flatiron's bootcamp prep. There were some days where I really locked in and impressed myself by the amount of work I did. I had a feeling I would try to apply for one of the bootcamps in NYC but I knew it would be a major committment. Then, there reached a point where I had to send in an application in order to continue with some prework, so I did. My path in life took me to a point where I realized I wanted to learn software engineering, but I wanted it to be a part of a life change. I have a five year old daughter, a loving partner, and I wanted to move to the west coast soon. I could easily see a career in programming fitting in with all those things. 

Fortunately I also had a roomate who was a software engineer and had previously worked with Flatiron alumni and relayed a lot of positive feedback about the school. While doing the prework I was really impressed with the support from technical coaches along the way. These things made me feel very positive about taking this step which encouraged me even more to learn. I was also feeling like this would be the perfect moment to learn if there ever was. If I'm going to do something which takes this level of commitment I was going to do it now and it was shaping up to be that software engineering was going to be that thing.  

I'd like to take this moment to shoutout Elias, my roomate who has been an awesome resource so far and has had such a positive attitude about giving his input. 

In terms of what I've covered in Flatiron's bootcamp in the past two weeks, I'd like to say that programming is a metaphor for life. Here was something I told myself after feeling a little discouraged after finally getting through the iterations section of Ruby fundamentals: "Iterations is really just about expanding your repertoire. Think about it, until and through iterations weve covered a lot of content... that we havent used yet - you're learning about how to use and manipulate data, and groups and lists of data. So what, everytime you're opening a lab you're scratching your head and are clueless until someone shows you (1 way) to pass the tests. And then afterward you're even more clueless as to why you understand it yet couldnt implement it yourself. Iterations is really the first time you are heavily applying different concepts at the same time. Its the first time you're applying your knowledge (that you just learned btw). Think about how some people like to talk - some people are number crunchers and put everything in life into mathematical terms to prove a point, some people like to speak hypothetically to prove a point. The iterations section is just about getting you acquainted with different ways of speaking (styles of code). While giving you a crash course on ruby keywords and methods. So yes, it is a lot! You will see that there are a ton of ways to solve most of the labs. For example, i favor conditionals (i like to speak hypothetically) but someone who took calculus as a math major in college is probably going to use wayyy more math and sometimes exclusively math and set more counters and increment more and use more comparison operators. Whether or not im making sense, my best advice is to use pseudocode. write comments, a lot of them. Before you get discouraged about being able to write the code focus on making sure you can say what you want to do in plain english. Not just what the lesson is asking you to do but exactly  what you want to do (ex. "populate a new array" "set a conditional" "loop" "iterate over" "retrieve an index"). Do not get discouraged - just tell yourself you need more practice and that you will get around to it as soon as you can." I liked how programming made me think creatively. I liked how it forced me to be organized, be precise, be clear, and make sense. I enjoyed the challenege of it. For me, a good challenge is a great motivator. These metaphors to life are some of the deeper reasons that made me want to learn software engineering.  


The content of your blog post goes here.
